substitution ciphers

in simple substitution ciphers, a particular letter or symbol is substituted for each letter. the letters are substituted in their normal order, usually with normal word divisions. such ciphers are recognized by the occurrence of a set of normal letter frequencies attached to the wrong letters. they are solved by using frequency analysis and by noting the characteristics of particular letters, such as the tendency to form doubles, common word prefixes and suffixes, common first and last letters in words, and common combinations, such as qu, th, er, and re.

a substitution cipher is performed by reordering the letters in the alphabet. for example, a cipher devised long ago by julius caesar shifts all the letters in the alphabet by three places. thus, when the letter a is needed, a d is used, and when a b is to be written, an e is used. the letters wrap around at the end of the alphabet. so, if a person wants to encipher a z, it is written as a c. similarly, a y is written as a b. the entire cipher is represented by two rows of letters. these rows are called a lookup table.

while the above substitution cipher is easy to remember, it is also easy to break. to make a substitution cipher more complex, multiple substitutions and sometimes even numbers are added to the cipher.

in multiple-substitution (polyalphabetic) ciphers, a keyword or number is employed. the first message letter might be enciphered by adding to it the numerical value of the first letter of the keyword; the second message letter is enciphered similarly, using the second letter of the keyword, and so on, repeating the keyword as often as necessary to encipher the whole message. when adding the numerical value of a keyword letter to a message letter, one starts counting with the message letter. thus, to encipher the word today by the code word dig, t becomes w, as d is the fourth letter of the alphabet (count t, u, v, w); o becomes w, as i is the ninth letter of the alphabet; and d becomes j, as g is the seventh letter of the alphabet. for the rest of the message the code word is repeated, and thus today is coded wwjdg.

by using combinations of the basic types of ciphers, ciphers can be created to various degrees of complexity. the key, however, should be easy to remember or reproduce, for without it the cipher is no longer a message but a puzzle. given sufficient time and material, most ciphers can be solved and their keys discovered, but for a particular purpose the complexity need be only so great as to obtain the level of security desired. military orders that must be kept secret for only a few hours, for example, can be encrypted in a cipher that would be entirely unsuited for diplomatic reports using a cipher over an extended period of time.
